# topography_effects_summits
*Iris T. Hickman, James S. Camac, Susanna E. Venn, Richard J. Williams, John W. Morgan*

Complex topography creates fine-scale microclimatic variation that can influence plant community assembly and likely drives responses to climate change. In high mountains, topographic heterogeneity has been demonstrated to mediate responses to regional climate warming by creating small-scale variation in solar radiation interception, which directly impacts temperature, water, and energy availability across landscapes. This study examines the influence of diverse topography on the distribution of vegetation on mountain summits to better understand the response of alpine plants to climatic change. We conducted vegetation surveys on 14 alpine summits in the Alpine Bioregion, Victoria, Australia and used variations in topographic features (aspect, slope, elevation) to model microclimates in solar radiation interception. We then constructed hierarchical models to examine the influence of solar radiation on diversity, the cover of ecological groups (endemics, generalist, exotic), and plant functional trait types. Our analysis revealed a varied and muted effect of a solar radiation gradient on alpine summit vegetation patterns. However, areas of the landscape that experience more solar radiation tended to shift towards a shrubbier, stress-tolerant constituent of their community, while areas with less solar radiation shift towards an herbaceous community. In addition, many species had wide geographical distributions. These findings indicate that the factors driving alpine plant population and community dynamics vary greatly across the complex topography landscape typical of high-elevation mountain ecosystems. The ability of summit species to exploit microclimatic variation may be facilitated by their broad distributions. Consequently, vegetation patterns due to fine-scale heterogeneity in solar radiation could mediate the direction of vegetation responses to climate change.
